


PLANETS IN OUR SOLAR SYSTEM 

As from the beginning of the existence of humans, we have always shown an interest in wanting to understand the unknown. We as humans for centuries have always wanted to find a sense of direction so we can understand the true meaning of our existence. As for ages we have had quite an amazing wonder of how everything became to be as it is today. Many centuries ago it was discovered that we live on a flat circular rock and we are at the center of the universe. It was believed that everything revolves around us and God the Great Creater made everything such as so because we were special as humans. As the years go on knew knowledge was acquired and that knew understanding of everything brought about change in how we view ourselves and our home planet Earth in our solar system and the universe.

In the great beginning of our solar system which has 8 planets, 1-star,5-identified dwarf planets and some other asteroids, comets and interstellar dust there was nothing but cosmic dust which consists of hydrogen gas particles and small solid dust particles. About 4.6 billion years ago a dense cloud of gas and dust collapsed likely triggered by a nearby supernova. The collapse formed a spinning solar nebula. At the centre gravity created the sun when nuclear fusion ignited. The sun gathered 99% of the matter, while leftover material in the disk slumped into planets, moons, asteroid and comets.

Small, rocky worlds formed close to the sun where only solid materials could survive the heat. Remnants that never formed into a planet partly due to Jupiters gravity became the asteroid belt. Massive giants formed farther out where ices and gasses could condense. The small rocky planets are called inner planets because they are closest to the sun and the massive gas giants are called outer planets due to them being far away from the sun.

Centuries ago until now in our morden days have been trying to map out our solar system, trying to create models that would better explain processes and changes in our solar system. It all started with the Geocentric model that was developed primarily by Ptolemy in 150CE. This model placed the Earth at the center of the universe to explain retrograde motion(Planets appearing to movew backwards) it used "epicycles" which are circles within circles. Then followed the Heliocentric model developed by Nicolus Copernicus in 1543 which proposed that the sun not the earth, was at the centre. While it simplified the explanation for retrograde motion, it still incorrectly assumed orbits were perfect circles. The Elliptical model developed by Johannes Kepler in 1609 improved the Heliocentric model by discovering that planets move in ellipses rather than circles. His three laws of Planetary motion allowed for highly accurate predictions of Planetary position. Then followed the Gravitational/Newtonian model developed by Isaac Newton in 16787 which provided the physical "why" behind these movements by identifying gravity as the force keeping planets in their orbits.

In our solar system there are processes that occur within it which is a result of planets and the sun interacting with each other and other existing matter such as asteroids or comets. Asteroids and comets move through space, sometimes colliding with planets or breaking apart. Moons orbit their planets shaped by tidal forces that can cause volcanic activity or ocean tides. The asteroid belt remains as leftover material that never formed into a planet. The Kepler belt and Oort cloud hold icy bodies that occasionally send comets inward. Solar wind streams outward from the sun interacting with planetary magnetic fields and atmospheres. Gravity governs the motion of all bodies maintaining orbital stability. Collisions and impacts continue to reshape surfaces, creating craters and altering planetary geology. Mean while, planetary atmosphere evolve through volcanic outgrowing, chemicals reactions and interactions with solar radiation.

In our solar system it is thought that life formed only on Earth about 4 billion years ago. Simple molecules like water, methane and ammonia combined under energy from lightning and sunlight. These reactions produced amino acids and nucleotides the building blocks of proteins and DNA. In Earths oceans these molecules formed a "primordial group" where they assembled into complex structures. Lipid membrane enclosed them, creating protocells capable of maintaining internal chemistry. RNA and later DNA allowed replication and storage of generic information natural selection favored stable self-replicating cells that evolved into more complex organisms. Other worlds like Mars, Europe and Enceladus may have had suitable conditions but Earth remains the only confirmed cradle of life.

When it comes to proving that the shape of the planets are spherical we take a look at Greek thinkers like Aristotle who noted Earths curved shadow on the moon during an eclipses. Sailors observed ships disappearing hull-first over the horizon, showing Earths Circumference using shadows in different cities. Galileo's telescope revealed round disks of planets and moons. Newton's gravity explained why large bodies naturally form spheres. Later, circumnavigation and satellite orbits confirmed planetary curvature.

Over the years as more and more discoveries are made we as humans get a more better understanding of our solar system along with the processes that occur within it. As more new information is received by studying our solar system we draw near closer to the truth of how everything works in it. These discoveries have totally changed the way we see ourselves existing in our solar system. We have over the past years been able to even send humans to the moon successfully by using knowledge we have already learned about our solar system and it's processes. The solar system is big and is one of many that exist out there in many galaxies. Every bright light in the sky represents a star, planet or some other object in space but to the many of stars that exist in our Milky Way Galaxy there's even more galaxies full of stars, so many that they form up the universe. The universe is big and so far we have only seen the tip of the ice berg which this opens up so many opportunities and reasons for us to explode and learn more about our universe.
